The Project Gutenberg eBook of Wise Men and a Mule, by W. C. Tuttle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Wise Men and a Mule

Author: W. C. Tuttle

Release Date: November 26, 2021 [eBook #66823]

Language: English

Produced by: Roger Frank and Sue Clark

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WISE MEN AND A MULE ***


[Illustration]

                         WISE MEN AND A MULE

                           by W. C. Tuttle

      Author of “Tippecanoe and Cougars Two,” “Powder Law,” etc.


“She’s the beautifulest story ever wrote. I tell yuh she’s a dinger,
and I’m a heap in favor of showin’ it to the multitude, _ad lib_, also
visibly.”

“Magpie” Simpkins shifts his feet on the table and leans back in his
chair, acting like he’s said something real smart.

“The best ever told,” admits “Old Testament” Tilton. “I longs to see
it portrayed piously and with feelin’ aforethought.”

“But can she be done?” asks Wick Smith. “The time is short.”

“Piperock can do anything she sets out to do,” states Magpie.

“And everything else that could possibly happen between the time she
starts and the time she finishes,” says I.

“I figured it was about time for you to say something, Ike,” opines
Magpie.

Me and “Dirty Shirt” Jones wasn’t invited to this conference, but
we’re there anyway. Buck Masterson, Wick Smith, Judge Steele, Old
Testament and Magpie are the committee. Dirty said there’d likely be
need of substitutes before the meeting had gone far, so we took it
upon ourselves to attend.

“Three wise men won’t be hard to find,” opines Buck.

“Town’s full of ’em,” says Dirty. “Why stop at three?”

“You’ve spoke your piece, Dirty,” states the judge.

“We’ve got to have a star, ain’t we?” asks Buck.

“Yeah, we sure have,” admits Wick.

“Beyond the shadder of a doubt in my mind,” says the judge. “The star
must be there, sheddin’ its effulgent rays across the desert, lightin’
up the—uh—place, as it were. It’s goin’ to be hard to get a suitable
camule or camules.”

“Camule?” asks Buck. “Them humpbacked quadruples?”

“Cam-el,” corrects Magpie. “Yeah, we’ve got to have one. We’ve got to
have a lot of presents and——”

“Who’s going to be Sandy Claws?” asks Dirty.

“Nobody!” snaps Magpie. “Them things are out of date. We’re just
steppin’ along ahead of them ancient has-beens, yuh betcha. Nobody can
go home from this celebration and say we had the same old stuff.”

“Be —— lucky if they has the use of their vocal cords ten days
afterwards,” opines Dirty. “Piperock’s Merry Christmas has always
knocked —— out of Happy New Year’s. I suppose you’ll frame up a death
trap and charge us a dollar apiece to get butchered for a Piperock
Holiday.”

“This is goin’ to be free,” states Magpie.

“Just like a suicide,” sighs Dirty.

“Since when was you and Ike Harper invited to this meetin’?” asks
Wick. “’Pears to me——”

“We’re going out,” says I, “but before we erases ourselves from your
presence we’d like to orate open and free that we will not be part,
parcel nor accessory to anything pertaining to or being of a Piperock
entertainment. We will not do this nor that, and neither will we do
thus and so. We will toil not and neither will we spin to any extent.
Our hearts are hard and our minds are made up like a mule’s.”

“Better wait until you’re asked,” advises Magpie.

“No trouble to sound a warning,” says Dirty Shirt.

“You’d ask in vain, Magpie,” says I.

“I am full of wisdom——”

“Don’t argue with that animated flagpole,” says Dirty. “You never get
no place talkin’ back to him, Ike.”

Dirty was right. I might as well argue with the shadder of death,
because Magpie can’t hear nothing but his own voice in a argument, and
he knows he can hoodle me into places where an angel couldn’t find
footing nor room to flop its wings.

I’m sleeping real hard when Magpie comes home that night, and he
proceeds to sit down on me, yanks my off ear and yells—

“Ike!”

I shoves him off and sets up, covering him with my gun.

“Ike,” says he, sober-like, “what is there around here that looks the
most like a ca-mel?”

“It’s a neck-and-neck race between you and Maud S.”

“Thanks.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

He takes off his clothes and goes to bed, kinda chuckling to himself.
Maud S wasn’t no relation to the famous trotting mare of the same
name, unless you figure back to the dim and distant past to the time
when the devil got sore at a balky horse. He tried to haul it along by
the ears, but the horse dug in his hoofs, the same of which stretched
them ears a heap. When the devil saw what he’d done, he laughed. The
horse, being kinda sore, ruined its vocal cords mocking the devil’s
laugh. That’s how we got our first mule.

Looking at Maud S from all angles I’d opine that she was the second
mule.

Maudie was long. I don’t think I ever seen so much mule all in one
piece. Maud’s neck was long and looked like it might fall off any old
time and bust her crop-eared head. Her feet never wore shoes, and the
ends of her hoofs turned up like the ends of ski snowshoes. Maud was
cock-eyed in her one glass-eye, and her heart was bitter toward
mankind.

Wick Smith owned her. He tried to sell her to a Piegan Indian, but the
old buck got one look at her and said—

_“Diaub seahhost! Klahowya!”_

The same of which means—

“Eyes of the devil! Good-by!”

Of course Maud ain’t no cam-el, but she ain’t so danged far removed as
yuh might think. The next morning Magpie gets a heap enthused over
their meeting.

“We sure planned out some _hy-iu_ festival. Goin’ to be great, Ike.
Sacred, solemn and satisfactory from all points of the compass.”

“Undertakingly speaking?”

“Not this time. There ain’t going to be no guns allowed. Every puncher
will have to leave his gun at the door. See the idea? Bill Thatcher
says he won’t bring no orchestra, but we’ll have one just as good.
Ricky Henderson has mastered the flute, and Wick Smith’s new drum is
due here today.”

“That’s a —— of a orchestra.”

“Yeah? ‘Frenchy’ Deschamps fell out with Bill Thatcher, and he’s goin’
to play his jew’s-harp in our orchestra. That makes three good pieces
for our side, Ike.”

“Tin whistle bass drum and a pheumonia noise.”

“Mm-m-m-m, well, it won’t be no Suzer’s band, that’s a fact, but it’ll
be music. Matilda Mudgett is going to sing something sacred, and Wick
says that his wife wants to recite.”

“Anything that Matilda could sing would seem sacred,” says I.

“She could sing the ‘Lone Star Trail’ and make it sound like ‘Rock of
Ages!’ Magpie, a face like hers would drive the evil from a burro’s
soul.”

“Uh—I almost forgot, Ike. You’re going to be a wise man.”

“You’re danged well right I am. I’m going to be so wise that I won’t
be within seven miles of here on Christmas Eve. I ain’t going to be
wise—I’m wise right now.”

“You and Dirty Shirt and Half Mile Smith.”

“No-oo-o-o!”

“If you’d rather have some other two men—get ’em, Ike. I’m leavin’
that part of it to you.”

“No-o-o-o! I won’t speak to nobody. I’m deaf and dumb. You and your
entertainment can go plumb——”

“Well, now that it’s all settled I feel better, Ike. You corral Dirty
and Half Mile and bring ’em over to the Mint Hall tonight, and you’ll
find out what you’ve got to do.”

“Magpie Simpkins, for gosh sake——”

“Ike, I’d tell yuh if I knowed, but I don’t. Old Testament knows just
what you’ve got to do, so be patient.”

I finds Dirty Shirt in Buck’s place, and he’s inoculated against
rattlesnakes. Dirty is bow-legged and cock-eyed, and wouldn’t be no
beauty if he wasn’t. I tells him what has come to pass, and he listens
close-like. Then he steps inside, yanks out his six-gun, and rings the
little bell on top of the Mint Hall three times in a row. Then he puts
his gun back and cocks his eye at me.

“I ain’t drunk, that’s a cinch. Mebbe my hearin’ is weak, Ike. Say
that all over again, will yuh?”

I explains once more. Dirty nods foolish-like.

“Sounded the same both times, Ike. What does a wise man have to do?”

“I don’t know, Dirty. We’ll find Half Mile and then they’ll explain it
to us.”

“Half Mile’s in jail. He shot three times at ‘Scenery’ Sims, and
Scenery put him in jail for it. Here comes Scenery now.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

There ain’t no description to fit Scenery, except that he’s about five
feet tall and his voice squeaks and his mustache only grows at the
corners of his big mouth, like the whiskers on a bobcat. He continues
to be our sheriff, because nobody has took the time to kill him,
except some poor shot, like Half Mile.

We explains the proposition to Scenery, and asks him will he let Half
Mile be a wise man.

“How about me?” asks Scenery. “Half Mile ain’t got no sense. I studied
ellie-cu-shun oncet, and I’ve got a lot of natural sense about things
like that.”

“We don’t give a ——,” says Dirty Shirt, “only we wants to die in good
company, Scenery.”

“Bein’ the sheriff I’ll see that they don’t get rough.”

“Since when has a sheriff been able to intimidate these Yaller Rock
snake hunters?” I asks. “The sight of you up there, Scenery, would be
like wavin’ a red rag at a bull.”

“Nawsir,” squeaks Scenery. “And besides they ain’t goin’ to be allowed
to bring in no guns, so the judge tells me.”

You can’t argue with no tin whistle like that, so we takes him with us
to our cabin, where we finds Magpie, Old Testament and the judge. We
explains that Half Mile is in jail and that Scenery is desirous to be
wise. Magpie says:

“That’s all right, if he keeps his mouth shut, but we don’t want no
wise man with a squeaky voice. We’ll let Ike speak all the words what
is spoke.”

“I can talk,” says Dirty Shirt, “and I’ve studied ellie-cu-shun. I can
make gestures, y’betcha.”

“We ain’t usin’ none in this ta-blew, Dirty,” states the judge.

“She’s to be pulled off almost in the dark, bein’ as she’s a night
pitcher, and gestures ain’t goin’ to do nothin’ but mebbe ruin the
thing. You hang onto your gestures and let nature take her course.”

“Talk ain’t much without yuh gestures,” complains Dirty.

“Your talk wouldn’t be much with ’em!” snaps Magpie. “Shut up.”

“If you knowed anythin’ about ellie-cu-shun, you’d ——”

“If you’re goin’ to be a wise man, Scenery,” says Magpie, soft-like,
“you’ll practise up right now by keepin’ your —— mouth shut. _Sabe?_
Go ahead and gesture if yuh want to, but keep still.”

“Well, if I can’t talk, I won’t, but jist the same—”

“Stop!” howls Magpie. “Scenery, if you don’t shut up you’ll never live
to run for office again.”

“I ain’t goin’ to run again,” says Scenery. “I wouldn’t have the job
again.”

“Judge,” says Magpie, “we’ll let a certain few bring their guns inside
the hall. Now, let’s get down to business. Is Pete Gonyer makin’ the
star?”

“Moon. He had a round piece of glass, but he says there ain’t no
danged way he can cut a star. Moon will do as well, won’t it?”

“If we can’t get a star; but the Bible says they followed a star.”

“Yaller Rock county won’t never know that,” says Dirty. “Not if yuh
don’t tell em.”

“We’re having the stage built twice as big, and then we’ll put dirt
over the boards so it will look like a desert. We’ll have a curtain
built along two sides and the back, and we’ve got to have them stairs
braced up a little before we can bring Maud S up into the hall.”

“Is Maud S comin’ to the show?” asks Dirty.

“She’s the ca-mel,” explains Magpie. “Goin’ to fix up some humps on
her back and yuh never could tell her from a ca-mel. _Sabe?_”

“Suppose she brays?” says Scenery.

“Suppose she gestures?” says Dirty. “My ——, but a mule can gesture.”

“Maud S ain’t got a kick left in her old carcass,” grins Magpie.

Just then Muley Bowles and Chuck Warner shows up, and joins us.

“Hear you’re goin’ to celebrate Christmas,” says Chuck, wiggling his
ears.

“Want the Cross J quartet to sing?”

“Nope,” says Magpie. “This is goin’ to be a sanitary proceedin’, and
there ain’t goin’ to be nothin’ done that might incite violence. We’re
just as much obliged as though you burned your shirt, Chuck.”

“We’d sure be willing to help your ceremony,” says Muley. “We’d sing
free gratis for nothin’, without chargin’ you a cent.”

“Nope. I ain’t got nothin’ against you your punchers—not as individual
human beings, but——”

“I gets your meanin’, Magpie,” says Chuck. “The Cross J ain’t good
enough for your danged old half-baked celebration, eh? Our harmonious
voices don’t fit into your blasted old program-me. We has suffered and
bled that Piperock might make a success of their unusual doings, but
from now on we don’t do a danged thing to help yuh out. Your tone of
voice is a insult to four of the best singers in Yaller Rock county.”

“I’m glad you understand what I meant,” says Magpie, mean-like. Muley
and Chuck turns around and beats it for town.

“I reckon you know best, Magpie, but them four Cross J go-devils might
do us wrong. Yuh might ’a’ let ’em sing one song,” opines Testament.

“Let’s get back to the ca-mel,” suggests Magpie.

“Let’s get away from Maud S,” says Dirty Shirt.

Then cometh Tellurium Woods, the danged old bald-headed bunch of wind.
He’s got a grin on his face.

                  *       *       *       *       *

“I got a idea,” says he. “I’ll be Sandy Claws.”

“Where did yuh get it?” asks Magpie. “This is a Sandy Claw-less
Christmas.”

“Aw-w-w, yuh can’t do that,” wails Tellurium. “Whatcha tryin’ to
do—put the celebration on the bum? Here’s the idea: I’ll dress up like
Sandy Claws, and when everybody is there and the program is about over
we’ll have Wick at the door. _Sabe?_ Somebody will give him messages
from Sandy Claws. Each message will show that he’s that much closer.
Everybody gets excited, don’t yuh see, and at the right time I comes
in. Fine, eh?”

“I seconds the motion,” says the judge, “I remember when I was a
kid——”

“I thirds it,” states Testament. “She’s a pious method, Tellurium.
Beats having Sandy come down the chimbley.”

“Well,” says Magpie, weary-like, “go ahead and do what yuh like, but I
want this tab-lew to be just like I sees it. Testament, will yuh look
up something for the wise men to say, and how we wants ’em to dress?”

“Yea, verily I will, Magpie.”

“I can make me some whiskers out of a horse’s tail,” says Tellurium.

“I hope the horse sees yuh takin’ them,” says Magpie.

Then the meeting broke up, and we adjourned to Buck’s place.

Scenery is tickled stiff to think he’s goin’ to be a actor, but I
ain’t cheering—yet. Me and Dirty Shirt are veterans in this acting
game, and we knows it takes nerve, speed and a strong constitution.

The old Romans and their wild animal arena never had nothing of
Piperock. She’s a place where milk comes in tin cans, and the only
honey is what the sand-hornets puts up for their own use. Her motto
is:

“Hurrah for ——! Who’s afraid of a little fire?”

In Buck’s place we finds Muley and Chuck, and pretty soon Telescope
Tolliver and Henry Peck comes in, which makes the Cross J quartet
complete.

“They won’t let us sing, Telescope,” says Muley, sad-like.

“They won’t?” says Telescope, surprized. “Won’t let us sing?”

“Not a note. Not only that but they insults us a heap.”

“Well,” says Henry Peck. “Well, the nerve of the pelicans.”

“Don’t blame us,” says Dirty Shirt. “We ain’t got a danged thing to do
with it—not even the disposition of our own re-mains after the
massacree is over.”

“They won’t let us sing,” repeats Telescope. “Whatcha know about
that?”

“Not even sing free,” admits Chuck, wiggling his ears real fast. “It
ain’t reasonable. Why, they won’t have no music a-tall. Bill
Thatcher’s orchestra ain’t comin’. Bill said it cost him a new bull
fiddle and a drum every time he played here, and he’s savin’ up to buy
a slip-horn.”

“You ought to be glad,” says Dirty Shirt. “You sure ought to, boys.”

“It’s a insult to harmony,” says Telescope. “We’ve almost got to the
point where we can sing ‘Tentin’ Tonight,’ with variations, and our
‘Sweet Marie’ sure does make the shivers run up your spine. ‘Jay Bird’
Whittaker says it’s got anything beat he ever heard since he busted
the ear tubes of his talkin’ machine.”

“What kind of a act does you perform, Dirty?” asks Hen Feck.

“I portrays Wisdom,” says Dirty. “There’s three of us, Hennery, three
of a kind against a full house.”

“Wisdom,” proclaims Muley, “Wisdom consists of more than three things,
Dirty. No three men can portray wisdom.”

“We’re goin’ to give her a try, Muley. Me and Ike and Scenery.”

“Wisdom—!” grunts Telescope. “You three?”

“And Maud S,” adds Dirty, sad-like.

“Oh,” says Chuck. “Oh, yeah. Well, mebbe you’ll get away with it.”

According to all we can find out, Christmas is the time of peace on
earth and plenty of good-will to everybody. She’s a time when the lion
and the lamb lies down together, and the cowpuncher forgets that there
is such a thing as a sheep-herder. It’s a time when men’s hearts are
filled with love toward their fellermen, and a six-shooter is only a
ornament; a time, when you can say, “Yoo-hoo” to a horse-thief,
without expecting to grab a harp the next minute.

“Yea, verily,” as Testament says. “It is a time when grown men become
like little children. Yeah, that’s a fact—mentally. Piperock ain’t got
any too much sense when she’s acting growed up; but right now—huh!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

There ain’t no reason why a lot of disreputable snake-hunters can’t
spend their Christmas in Paradise or Curlew; but they don’t. Nope.
They clutters up Piperock to partake of our good cheer. Me and Dirty
looks over that aggregation of incompetents, and the sight drives all
wisdom, peace and good will from our hearts.

“Big Foot” Forrest, “Cactus” Collins, “Mex” Mason, “Pole-Cat” Perkins,
“Haw” Harris, et cettery, running the gamut of undesirable
horse-thieves. “Hassayampa” Harris, who is a uncle of “Haw,” brings
his bunch of hard-boiled punchers over from Curlew, and Mike Pelly
heads the aggregation of incompetents from Paradise.

The Seven A, Triangle, Five Dot, Circle C and the Cross J all cometh
to hive up in Piperock and partake of the Christmas cheer, and
everything else that might come to pass. They’ve got the Mint Hall
decorated for the occasion, and so forth. They built the stage out
until she’s about twenty feet square, and about five feet high.

A couple of horse-thieves, who studied art in the penitentiary,
painted the scenery. It’s canvas hung at the back of the stage, and
they painted it black and put on a lot of white stars. Sticking in the
middle of the canvas is kind of a lantern rigging, with a round glass
in it and a lamp inside.

“That’s the moon,” explains Magpie. “When this is pulled off that will
be the only visible light. _Sabe?_ Desert, yuh understand? We’re goin’
to put some rocks and a bunch of cactus on the stage.”

“What do we do?” squeaks Scenery.

“You will be asleep,” explains Testament. “The lamp will be turned low
and have a cover over it. Everything will be still. I’ll have somebody
behind the curtain to take off the cover of the moon, and slowly turn
up the lamp. One of you wise men wakes up and sees the dim light. You
wakes up the rest of the bunch, and you all stands up, looking at the
light.

“Then you—Magpie. I reckon we better have the mule layin’ down, hadn’t
we? Well, you wakes up the mule, and then you all starts walking
slow-like toward the back of the stage, and then we drops the curtain.
That’s all there is to it.”

“We’ll have to throw that mule,” opines Wick. “Better hawg-tie it,
too, and let somebody cut the ropes when they’re ready to go. The
humps are all ready to be cinched on.”

“What do we wear?” I asks.

“My wife is makin’ the costumes out of gunny-sacks,” says Wick.

“We’ve got to have something what looks like presents,” opines
Testament. “I’ve got a picture, which shows a lot of vases and stuff
like that.”

“My wife’s got some stuff that will be just the cheese,” says Wick.
“We’ll use some of her chiny vases.”

“What do we have to say?” asks Scenery.

“Ike will do the sayin’,” says Magpie. “He’ll be the one what wakes up
first and he will say—uh—what was it, Testament?”

“Lo, there shineth a bright light. Let’s go to it.”

“My——!” gasps Dirty Shirt, pious-like. “But save the wimmin and
children first.”

“It’s sure goin’ to be a wonderful thing, and will teach a moral,”
says Testament.

“Yes,” says I. “And the moral is: Let well enough alone.”

“I’d ought to say them words,” squeaks Scenery. “I think a thing like
that needs appropriate gestures, and I’ve studied——”

“Might be better,” says Wick. “Gestures helps a lot. Remember Willyum
Jennins Bryan, when he was preachin’ fer silver. If Scenery would sort
of loosen up his vocal cords a little——”

“Let him say ’em,” says I. “I’d hate to pass out with them words on my
lips. Scenery, you’re elected.”

“All right,” squeaks Scenery. “I’ll study up my ellie-cushun a little.
Feller gets kinda rusty, you know it.”

“Yeah,” admits Magpie, “and kinda squeaks. You don’t need study—you
need some kerosene and then a application of axle-grease, Scenery.”

The next morning we took Maud S up the steps into the hall, and I’m
here to say that Maud S made life miserable for us. A mule is hard to
argue with on the level, but try getting one half-way up a stairs and
have it stop to think. We took Maud S in sitting down, bucked her onto
the stage, where she lays down and refuses to get up.

“Fine!” says Wick. We “won’t have to hawg-tie her.”

“Stage fright,” opines Magpie.

“Safety first,” says I. “Animals have instincts, and hers is to get
below the line of fire.”

Me and Dirty meets the Cross J quartet, and they’re getting cheerful.

“No,” says Muley, “we ain’t goin’ to no celebrashun. They have done us
dirt and we sickens to our soul at their per-fid-i-tee.”

“Sheveral per-fid-i-tees,” nods Telescope. “Group aroun’ me while we
shing a shong of gladness over the merry Chris’mas time. All together
now:

    “Oh, the coyote said, I’m better than a puncher,
      With a gun that goes blam, blam!
    He may die and go up to heaven,
      But his skin ain’t worth a ——”

“You sure does get into the Christmas spirit,” opines Dirty. “That’s
one of the sweetest things I ever heard.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Then I calls Dirty outside, and I says to him, like this:

“Dirty, me and you have got to stay sober. A drunk ain’t goin’ to have
no chance a-tall in there if anything goes wrong. If we hangs around
with them celebratin’ shorthorns we won’t be in no shape to get up and
foller that star. We’ll be just like Maud S, which can’t or won’t get
up.”

“That’s right, Ike. We’ll get a couple of quarts for ourselves and
keep away from them hard drinkers. Don’t yuh reckon Maud S will get up
at the right time?”

“She’s plumb rooted, Dirty.”

“Uh-huh. I know how to do it, Ike. Come on.”

Dirty went over to Wick’s store, and later on I meets him; and we goes
up to my cabin.

We’ve got them two quarts of hooch, so we has quite a little time of
our own, waiting until the afternoon gets to the sere and yaller leaf.
I wakes up and finds Dirty with flour all over his clothes, but he
won’t tell what he’s trying to do.

Magpie hunts us up and acts peevish toward us.

“Gosh a’mighty,” he complains. “Ain’t yuh got no sense? We’re tryin’
to re-hearse and you fellers hide out down here. Come on.”

We just gets to the door, when we meets Muley Bowles.

“F’r th’ lasht time—do we shing?” asks Muley.

“You do not!” declares Magpie. “I thought you knowed that, Muley.”

“May you resht in peash,” says Muley. “May your anchestors rise up and
mock you for bein’ a —— fool. Autographically schpeakin’:

    “May your hair wear out
      And your nose break off
    And your teeth shake loose
      From whoopin’ cough.

“Thish is the best wishes of your friend Muley Bowels, E-squire,
December twenty-fourth.”

“Tha’s good,” says Dirty. “That’s fine. Roshes are blue, vi’lets are
pink—uh—no, that ain’t it. Vi’lets are red and roshes are blue—Haw!
Haw! Haw! No knife can cut our love up. Haw! Haw! Haw!”

“Why don’t you say something, Ike?” asks Magpie. “You’re just as drunk
as they are.”

“Yeah, but I’m mean drunk, Magpie. There ain’t nothin’ flowery about
me. I ain’t in no mood to wish whoopin’ cough nor violets on mine
enemies. Let’s go.”

“Sufferin’ sun-fish!” grunts Magpie. “Look at Rip Van Winkle.”

“It’s me—Tellurium,” says the apparition. “Don’t I look it?”

He sure did. He’s got a old bear-skin overcoat on, and about three
strings of sleigh-bells around his waist. He’s got a stove-pipe hat on
his head and on his chin is a bunch of whiskers made from the tail of
a white horse. Personally, I think he’s the dangest-looking thing I
ever saw.

“Well,” says Magpie, “you sure look it, Tellurium, but I’m danged if I
know what you do look like.”

“Sandy Claws,” says Tellurium, proud-like. “I’m him. Come up to show
you what can be done when you’ve got the ambition.”

“Sandy Claws?” says Magpie. “No, no Tellurium. Sandy Claws don’t look
like that. What do yuh want to do—scare folks? You look like a cross
between a item of natural hist’ry and a smallpox germ.”

“I comes into the program as a sort of special thing,” says Tellurium.

“No,” says Magpie, “not into my program, Tellurium. You better go out
and scare coyotes with that outfit. I ain’t using no Sandy Clawses
anyway.”

“I’ve went to a lot of trouble,” complains Tellurium.

“So’ve we,” says Muley. “He won’t let us shing, and now he don’t want
no Sandy Clawses.”

“I’d make a good one, too,” says Tellurium.

“Yeah, you would—not,” says Magpie. “I’d just as soon see a wild bull
come in there dressed like that, Tellurium. You’d ruin the show, you
know it.”

“Let’s not talk to him,” says Muley. “He has no soul, Tellurium.

“He won’t let us shing. Nossir. No Sandy Claws, no shongs—where’s your
ol’ Christmas?”

“Come on, Ike,” says Magpie. “Let ’em wail. I’m goin’ to pull off one
show that Piperock can be proud of, yuh bet your life.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

We went up to Mint Hall. Mrs. Smith and Matilda Mudgett are there,
sort of strutting around like a pair of fool-hens. Ricky Henderson,
Wick Smith and Frenchy Deschamps are there, fixing their orchestra
seats. Wick’s new drum is there, and he’s some proud of it.

“Mr. Harper,” says Matilda, “have you ever heard ‘Spring, Lovely
Spring’?”

“Not since last April,” says I.

“We are going to render it tonight,” says she.

“We?”

“Me and Mrs. Smith. She has a lovely alto.”

I goes over and talks to Ricky.

“Ricky, you knows something about music—what is a alto?”

Ricky thinks deep for a while, and then he says:

“Ike, did yuh ever let out a whoop, and then hear the same whoop come
back to yuh? That’s it?”

“I thought that was a echo.”

“Yeah, sure; but that’s only when yuh hear one reply. Sabe? When yuh
hears two replies—that’s alto. It’s a Hungarian word, which means
two.”

“What does it mean when you hears more than two?”

“That’s basso profundo, Ike.”

“I thinks Maud S is paralyzed,” complains Wick. “She don’t seem to
have no use of her legs.”

“For this we offer much thanks,” says Dirty.

“But she’s got to get up and go with yuh,” says Wick. “You can’t leave
her layin’ there on the stage.”

“She’ll get up,” declares Dirty. “I know a lot about mules. Lemme
alone and don’t worry about Maud S.”

“There ain’t much use of rehearsin’,” squeaks Scenery; “I’m the main
thing up there, and I’ve studied my gestures a-plenty, and I know the
words fine.”

“We’ve got to put the humps on Maud S,” says Wick. “We can hang some
stuff over the humps, so nobody will know she ain’t a cam-el. You know
how they does in a circus, Magpie?”

Me and Dirty, not wishful to get the least hazy, decides to buy us
some more bottle cheer, instead of carousing around with the common
herd, and we communes with each other in my cabin, until the shades of
night have come down upon us. Then we finds our way back to the hall.
We’ve got a full audience—in more ways than one. Doughgod Smith has
been appointed door-keeper and he annexes our guns as we goes in.

“Yuh can’t take your guns in with yuh,” he states. “Them is orders.”

He’s got a lot of belts and holsters, but few guns hanging on a hook.
Dirty looks ’em over and picks out a good-looking gun, which he shoves
down inside his waistband.

“Them orders don’t say yuh can’t pack a strange gun, do they?”

“Not my orders,” says Doughgod. “They tell me not to let any man in
with his gun, that’s all. You ain’t settin’ no precedent, Dirty. I
reckon every man in the hall is packin’ a strange gun, but there’s one
satisfaction—they can’t shoot more than six time per each, ’cause I’ve
got all their extra ammunition.”

I picks out an old decrepid .44, and goes inside the hall. I looks
over that congregation and I can’t see where Doughgod had any reasons
for being cheerful. There’s at least a hundred men in there, which
means six hundred shots, which is usually plenty and sufficient.

The reward notices are sure well represented, and you could just about
lynch the whole bunch and not make any mistake.

We finds the acting talent behind the curtain. Scenery is all dressed
up in a gunny-sack gown, with a ribbon tied around his head and no
boots on. He’s making gestures like a prize-fighter.

“My ——!” gasps Dirty. “Would yuh look at that?” Scenery jerks one fist
outward and upward, swings the other arm behind him, like he was
guarding his rear, and then squeaks:

“Lo, there shineth a bright light. Let’s go to it.”

“Mark an X after Scenery Sims,” says Dirty. “He won’t last.”

We goes over where Wick is looking at Maud S. She’s still laying down
and don’t act like she’s ever get up again.

“’Fraid she’s on her last legs,” says Wick. “Yessir, I reckon we’re
goin’ to lose Maudie.”

“’Fraid?” snorts Mrs. Smith. “That de-eared hay-hound? Let her die.”

“Not until she’s been a ca-mel, maw,” says Wick, and then he goes out
to set down beside his new drum.

Dirty sets down beside Maud S and takes her head in his lap.

“Ain’t the Cross J quartet going to sing?” asks Matilda.

Old Testament shakes his head.

“Nope. They got mad—them and Tellurium. They all went home.”

“Tweet, tweet, tweet,” goes the flute.

“Bum! Bum! Bum!” goes the drum.

“Whar-r-r-oo-o-o-o-o-m-m-m-m,” goes the jew’s-harp.

“The orchestra is tunin’ up,” observes Dirty. “We ain’t got long to
live, Ike.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Then old Judge Steele steps out through the curtain, and the hum of
conversation dies down.

“Feller citizens and ladies,” says the judge, “the first thing on the
program is a du-it. Miss Mudgett is going to sing ‘Spring, Lovely
Spring,’ with the kind assistance of Mrs. Smith. This here is a
soup-ranner and alter du-it. We asks yuh to bear with the orchestra to
the limit of your patience, as this is their first appearance
together.”

“Who?” asks Big Foot Forrest.

“All of ’em. They’re acquainted, but that’s about all you can say for
’em. All right, Wick—let her go.”

“Tweet, tweet, tweet! Bum, bum, bum, bum! Whar-r-r-oo-o-o-m-m-m-m!”

Mrs. Smith and Matilda goes out through the curtain. Somebody laughs
out loud and then comes a thud.

“All right—go ahead,” says Hair Oil Heppner’s voice. “Big Foot thought
he saw somethin’ funny, but he’s forgot what it was.”

The song starts and this is how she sounds:

“Tweet, bum, Spree-e-e-hing, lovely spree-e-e-hing, tweet, tweet, bum,
whar-r-r-oo-o-m, Spree-e-hing, Spree-e-e-hing, bum, bum, kerong-g-g-g,
tweet, tweet.

“You cree-e-e-heep o’er me-e-e-adhows be-e-e-e-right,
whar-r-r-room-m-m, bum, bum, tweet, tweet, o’er me-e-e-adhows
be-e-e-right, bum, bum, bum, tweet, tweedle, wharoom, whar-r-r-oom——”

“Whoa, Blaze!”

I whirls just in time to see Magpie get kicked behind the knees by
Maud S, who is laying down. She must ’a’ just sort of cramped herself
and then let fly with both hoofs.

Magpie turns plumb over and goes out through the curtain and right
into Mrs. Smith, who is straining over “be-e-e-right;” and when they
hit the platform she’s on top.

“From Spring to Fall!” yelps Mex Mason.

Mrs. Smith gets off poor Magpie, and lets out a wail:

“O-o-o-o-o-o-oh! Every time I try to do something, some hammer-head
comes bustin’ along and spoils it!”

“Did you hit her on purpose?” demands Wick, standing up.

“Your —— mule—” begins Magpie, foolish-like.

“You done it on purpose!” howls Mrs. Smith.

Wick believed her, I reckon, cause he throwed his drum stick right at
poor Magpie. It was a good shot. It came right through the hole in the
curtain and it hit Judge Steele on the bridge of his nose. The old boy
sort of got dignified acting.

“Wonderful,” says Dirty. “Wonderful cons’tution.”

The judge just walks around the stage, making gestures and working his
lips, but there ain’t no words. Pretty soon he stops, seems to listen,
and then he says, soft-like: “Guilty? Why, gentlemen, that man is as
innocent as a new-born baby.”

“Knocked back seven years,” says Dirty, awed-like. “That’s what he
said the time he was my lawyer, and that was seven years ago.”

The crowd out in front are talking loud, and I know danged well that
there’s going to be trouble if we don’t keep going. Mrs. Smith comes
waddling in, follered by Matilda and Magpie.

Mrs. Smith is sore as a boil.

“I will not sing another note,” she declares. “Every time I start to
do anything in public——”

“Maud S is getting restless,” states Scenery. “We better pull off our
act.”

“Can yuh get her up at the right time, Dirty?” asks Magpie.

“Get things set, and I’ll do my dangest.”

Then they cleared everybody away, while we got ready. Me and Dirty and
Scenery are all dressed in them gunny-sack gowns, and have got our
boots off.

They’ve got a big bunch of cactus and a lot of rocks, which they puts
around to make it look like a desert. Pete Gonyer is behind the back
curtain, ready to take the cover off the moon, and then turn up the
lamp. Maud S is making funny noises in her throat, but Dirty is
setting on her head.

“What’s the matter with her?” I asks.

“Speed-crazy,” grins Dirty.

“Get ready,” says Magpie. “Now, for gosh sakes, make this look real.”

They blew out all the lights except one in the back of the room, and
then pulled the curtain.

“What does she represent—a load of dirt?” asks Pole-Cat Perkins.

“That’s a —— of a thing to ride thirty miles to see,” opines “Windy”
Wilkins.

“Where is the moon?” squeaks Scenery, in a whisper. “Pete, where in ——
are yuh?”

“Aw, ——!” groans Pete. “Magpie, did yuh turn out this lamp?”

“It was lit when I left there!” snaps Magpie. “You must ’a’ blowed on
it.”

“I never blowed on nothin’!”

“Haw! Haw! Haw!” roars Art Miller. “This is one funny game. Like a
minstrel show. Pete, ask him why he thinks yuh blowed on it.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Comes a little bit of light, and I feels Scenery climb to his feet.
There he stands in the gloom, pointing up and down and sidewise, and
then he squeaks:

“Lo, there bringth a slight—uh—slineth a bite—I mean—a—a—lineth
a—let’s go to it—uh—to it.”

“Haw! Haw! Haw!” howls somebody. “Pete Gonyer’s lightin’ the moon!”

I turns and takes a look. There is Pete at the back of the stage. He’s
got the cover off the moon, and is trying to get the old lamp to
light.

“Dang it!” he howls. “I’ve turned the wick plumb into the bottom!”

“Whoa, Maud!” howls Dirty. “Help me hold her, Ike!”

I turns, and there is Maud S standing on her hind legs, and, as I
look, them humps, which wasn’t well cinched, being as she was laying
down at the time, swing down and just about fill up all the space
between her front and hind legs.

“Ho-hold her!” wails Dirty; but Maud S thinks she’s a circus animal.

Hold her? Man, that mule, after all these years, found out that she
had authority to go to some place. She waltzes around a couple of
times, busts a hole in the stage and falls over backwards into the
orchestra.

Wick Smith falls over backwards, pulling his new drum over with him,
thereby saving his part of the orchestra.

“Whoo-o-o-ee! Pow-w-w-w-der Ri-i-ver!” yowls a puncher, and a circle
of chairs lands around Maud S, trying to block her, but Maud S ain’t
to be stopped.

She bucked plumb over the top of Wick Smith, and that drum rattled
against her heels.

Zowie! She telescoped and lifted that drum with both hind feet. Dirty
Shirt was just going to jump off the stage to attack her from the
rear, and that drum caught him in midair. Dirty comes plumb back onto
the stage and lands setting down in that bed of cactus. The drum hit
me in the knees, and I went plumb over the top of it and dug my chin
into the desert.

When I got my senses again I sees that about seven punchers have hold
of Maud S, and are trying to hold her.

“Lights!” yelps Wick. “Light some lamps. My ——, my drum is busted!”

“—— your old drum!” howls Dirty Shirt, standing on the stage, trying
to lift the seat of his pants loose from himself.

“O-o-o-o-oh, the tab-lew is ruined!” wails Mrs. Smith.

Everybody helped light the lamps, and then we stands and looks at each
other. Maud S looks like her course was about run, but them punchers
don’t take any chances.

“Sandy Claws has come!” yells a voice at the door, and we all takes a
look. I never seen anything like that apparition. It’s a two-year old
steer, wearing a bear-skin overcoat, with a string of sleigh-bells
around it, and on the lower lip of the danged animal is Tellurium
Wood’s false whiskers, and over one horn is that tall hat. The steer
is about half way into the hall when we see it coming, and its tail is
twisted over its back. Around its mouth is twisted a rope, which is
yanked off as it humps into the door.

“Ba-a-a-rr!” blats that steer, like it hurt all over, and right up
that room it comes, romping regardless of life or limb.

I know it was Chuck’s voice that yelled—

“Sandy Claws has come.”

“Ho-o-old fast!” yells a puncher, and just then the steer lams into
poor Maud S, scattering the punchers. Hair Oil Heppner tries to
bulldog that locoed animal, but he might as well ’a’ tried to bulldog
a box-car.

Then Maud S gets enervated again, and things begin to boil a-plenty.

“Ba-a-a-a-w!” bawls the steer.

“Ha-a-a-a-w!” sings Maud, and the both of them starts gamboling toward
the stage.

“Git ba-a-a-ck!” yowls Pete Gonyer. “Daw-w-w-gone yuh, git back!”

Rip-i-i-p! The steer gets its horns into the curtain, rips about
twenty feet of it loose, and starts to climb the stage.

Crash! The moon went down, and the danged old oil lamp inside
exploded.

“Fire! Fire!” howls Judge Steele, and then he picks up that blazing
moon and whales away at the steer with it.

Clank! The judge was left-handed, which might account for the poor
throwing, but he got his feet tangled in some of that loose curtain
and hit Scenery Sims right in the head with that heavy moon.

Bang! Somebody took a shot at the steer and knocked several bells, and
one of them danged bells hit me in the nose. I hate to get hit in the
nose with a bell. I hates to get hit in the nose with anything, but I
sure does detest a bell. I can see folks going out of the door as fast
as they can travel. I seen Hair Oil climbing onto poor Maud S, and
then my time is all taken up with that danged steer.

All this stuff is taking place a lot faster than I can tell it. I
bulldogged that steer. It was the first steer I ever tried to bulldog,
and if all future steers will keep away from me it will be the last.

                  *       *       *       *       *

I hooked onto his horns just in time to feel my feet dangle off the
edge of the stage, the same of which helped my act quite a lot. The
steer upends from my weight, and me and that steer landed into a
jumble of chairs, and over the top of us goes Maud S, celebrating her
second childhood by making Hair Oil pull leather.

The few remaining folks in the hall sort of celebrates by taking some
shots at the lights, the same of which makes our immediate future
kinda gloomy.

“Lo, I see a bright light!” squeals Scenery’s voice.

“Sus-sunfish, you crop-eared coyote!” yells Hair Oil, and then comes a
crash of glass.

“My ——!” yells Magpie. “She throwed Hair Oil out of the window! Where
are you, Ike?”

“Keep away!” I yells. “I’m paralyzed all the way down from my upper
lip and I don’t know whether me or the steer is on top.”

“Paralyzed —— ——!” howls Dirty. “Wish I was. Who in —— got the idea of
puttin’ cactus on the stage?”

“Look out for that mule!” yelps Magpie, and I looks up at the dim
figure of that locoed mule, almost over me. I yanks away from my steer
and the steer yanks right with me. Under ordinary conditions I’d ’a’
been able to get away, but I’ve got one leg through a string of them
sleigh-bells, and when that steer starts for the door, Ike Harper
E-squire went right along—on the back of his neck.

I hooked a lot of chairs on my way, kinda trying to impede the hoofs
of progress, but that scared steer made funny little noises and keeps
going. There’s a lantern hung at the head of the stairs, and I reckon
the steer was hunting for light.

Just before we hits the top of the stairs I hears a strain of quartet
music:

“Tentin’ to-o-o-o-night, tentin’ to-o-o——”

Crash!

We hit the doorway with our assortment of furniture, and the next
thing I know I’m amid more feller mortals and we’re all traveling the
downward path. I sees some red, white and blue lights, and I’m loose.
I reckon the bell strap busted. I gets to my feet, dodging stars and
other aerial impediments, when the stairs almost shakes out from under
me, and I gets a glimpse of Maud S falling downstairs.

Folks, I jumped—but too late. Me and Maud S landed at the bottom
together. I grabs the mule with both hands, and I feels her get up
with me hanging to some part of her anatomy. It’s about twenty feet
from the bottom of the stairs to the door, and I rode some part of
that crop-eared mule as far as the exit, where the top of the door
slapped me in the face and I went into the land of Once Upon a Time.

I’m just about to live happy ever afterwards, when something seems to
wake me up. I feels a dragging sensation, along with other painful
things, and then I dimly hears Dirty Shirt say—

“You’ve gotta help me, Muley.”

“I’ve gotta have a little help myself,” wails Muley. “I tell yuh that
danged steer knocked me down and then the mule fell over me.”

“But poor old Ike is de-e-e-ad!” sobs Dirty.

“He’ll keep,” croaks Muley; “but I’ll spoil if I don’t have help.”

“Yuh gotta help me drag him home, Muley. You was to blame for his
de-mise.”

“Naw, I wasn’t, Dirty. Chuck got the idea of dressin’ up that steer in
Tellurium’s clothes. Tellurium was sore, too. We twisted a wire around
the steer’s tail to make it bawl when the gag was pulled off.

“We just wanted to make it blat at Magpie. Nossir, yuh can’t blame us
for it, ’cause that mule would ’a’ killed him anyway. I’d like to know
what in —— woke up that gone-to-seed mule.”

“There ain’t nobody to hear,” says Dirty, “so I’ll tell yuh. I took a
can of red pepper and a can of ginger and mixed ’em. Then I made a gob
of dough in Dee’s shack and put the hot stuff in the middle. _Sabe?_
Maud S. swallered it. That’s all.”

“They’d kill us if they knew,” groans Dirty.

“Death’s stinger wouldn’t hurt me,” groans Muley.

I crawls to my feet, and they don’t see me until I’m standing up
beside ’em.

“You—you—uh—” stammers Dirty. “You won’t tell, w-will yuh, Ike?”

“Ain’t you dead—yet?” gasps Muley.

“Enough,” says I, “enough to foller out the old saying—dead men tell
no tales. I’ve got eyesight enough left to see the lights of Buck’s
place.”

“L-let’s go tut-to it,” stammers Dirty.

Which shows that Piperock never started anything that they couldn’t
finish—after a fashion.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WISE MEN AND A MULE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
